Add testing guidance (#40)
nhsbsa-data-analytics/nhsbsa-analytical-code-assurance-playbook: guidance/02-quality-assured/pages/05-tested.qmd

* **Unit Tests:** Focus on testing the smallest individual components, in isolation. They should be fast and numerous.
* **Integration Tests:** Verify that different components or modules work together as expected.
* **End-to-End (E2E) Tests:** Testing the entire application flow, from start to finish.

## Why should we test our code?

* **Verify Correctness:** Ensure the code behaves as intended and meets requirements.
* **Catch Bugs Early:** Identify and fix issues during development when they are cheapest and easiest to resolve.
* **Provide Confidence:** Increase confidence in the code's reliability and the [reproducibility][reproducible] of results.
* **Enable Refactoring:** Act as a safety net, allowing developers to improve code structure without fear of breaking functionality.
* **Serve as [Documentation][documented]:** Well-written tests can illustrate how code is intended to be used and its expected behavior.
* **Improve Design:** Writing testable code often leads to better, more [modular][modular], and loosely coupled designs.

> * **Facilitate Collaboration:** Ensure that contributions from different team members integrate correctly.

Reviewer: I'm going to commit the suggestion, but notice that the playbook itself is called "Analytical **Code** Assurance". Do we need to consider if that is the right name?

---
title: "Tested"
description: "Rigorous testing is fundamental to assuring quality of code."
---

> ## Pre-requisite reading
>
> * [AF Duck book: Testing code][duck-book-testing]
> * [NHSBSA DDaT playbook: Testing][ddat-playbook-testing]

## What types of testing should be done?

Testing is fundamental to assuring quality of analytical processes.
It helps us ensure the things we've written to generate our analyses (e.g. code, workflows, excel workbooks, etc) work as expected and reduces the risk of errors in our results. 
Testing also builds confidence that results are [reproducible][reproducible] and helps anyone to [easily verify this][transparent].

> * **Unit Tests:** Focus on testing the smallest individual components, in isolation. They should be fast and numerous.
> * **Integration Tests:** Verify that different components or modules work together as expected.
> * **End-to-End (E2E) Tests:** Testing the entire application flow, from start to finish.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are many different types of tests, each aimed to address a different aspect of quality assurance. 
In analytical work, the following are often the most important to consider:
| Type | Description | Benefits |
| ----- | ------------- | -------- |
| Unit Tests | Small isolated tests to ensure each individual component works as expected | Help you locate and identify the root cause of any issues or errors |
| Integration Tests | Testing interactions between two or more individual components (for example, can the data output by one component be used as the input to another?) | Verify that different components or modules work together as expected |
| End-to-end Tests | Testing the entire analysis from start to finish | Verify that the whole process produces the expected results, given certain inputs |
```

* **Write Testable Processes:** Design and implement analytical processes with testing in mind.
* **Keep Tests Independent and Fast:** Ensure tests can run independently and quickly to provide rapid feedback.
* **Write Clear and Readable Tests:** Tests should be [easy to understand][documented], indicating what is being tested and why.
* **Maintain Tests:** As your analysis [evolves][version-controlled], be sure to update your tests, refactor them, remove obsolete tests and add new ones. 

### Testing code
If you are producing analysis using code, the following points can help you go even further:
* **Use Testing Frameworks:** Use established testing frameworks appropriate for the coding language.
* **Automate Test Execution:** Run tests automatically, especially as part of a Continuous Integration (CI) pipeline, to get fast feedback on changes.

It is important to also ensure that new changes or bug fixes haven't introduced a bug in code that was already tested successfully. 
This is a good reason to regularly run all existing unit, integration and E2E tests and to do so by CI.

> ## How do we define success?
> 
> * **Confidence:** Teams feel confident about their code.
> * **Reliability:** Bugs discovered after release of code are rare.
> * **Efficiency:** Automated tests in CI quickly inform developers of potential issues.
> * **Quality:** Test quality and relevance is high, and regressions detected.
> * **Maintainable:** The tests are understandable and do not hinder refactoring of the code.
> * **Verification:** Tests clearly demonstrate that the code meets its specified requirements.
> 
> ## How do we measure success?
> 
> * **Documenting:** Records of test failures and solutions are made.
> * **Maintenance:** Bugs and errors identified are recorded and addressed, with tests being added where appropriate.
> * **Retrospectives:** Testing is included in retrospective discussions, and any areas for improvement identified are planned in.
> * **Feedback:** We seek feedback on a project, including its tests, from contributors.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## How do we define success?
	
* Teams feel confident about their code.
* Bugs discovered after release of code are rare.
* Automated tests in CI quickly inform developers of potential issues.
* Test quality and relevance is high, and regressions detected.
* The tests are understandable and do not hinder refactoring of the code.
* Tests clearly demonstrate that the code meets its specified requirements.
	
**Lookout for:**
	
- Apply the 80/20 rule - the most effective use of time writing tests will be spent on the first 20% of tests that cover 80% of the key logic. 
- Plan for long term maintenance - you'll need to maintain your tests, so design them carefully and stop before you write more than you can realistically keep up-to-date.
- Avoid testing implementation details - focusing on the *what* rather than the *how* will improve your designs, make refactoring easier and avoid you having to update tests every time you update your code.
```
